top 

first line in top
top - 22:01:39 up 19 min,  0 users,  load average: 0.04, 0.06, 0.18

22:01:39 -current hour
up 19 min, - uptime [time from last system start]
0 users -number of active user
load average 0.52, 0.58, 0.59 -load average is very important, yet very often misunderstood

second line in top 
Tasks: 116 total,   1 running, 115 sleeping,   0 stopped,   0 zombie

total -show all process in the system
running -currently active process. it means, these processes are using CPU right now
sleeping -generally -process is waiting for something. it may be I/O operation for ex.
stopped -stopped processes
zombie -very important state. it a process which had finished a job but still has entry in the process table. means these process are waiting for exit(). 

third line in top
%Cpu(s):  0.3 us,  1.0 sy,  3.0 ni, 95.7 id,  0.0 wa,  0.0 hi,  0.0 si,  0.0 st

us -user all user processes are combined in this number
sy -system processes owned by system(kernel) 
ni -nice, nice allows us to change the priority of the process.
	: the stand value for processes is 0
	: but we can modify it from 19(lowest) to -20(highest)
id -idle time means that the system is bored and do nothing.
wa -iowait, the number of represents the time (which is a subset of the idle time) when process waiting for inpur/output operation.
hi -hardware interrupt, these are physical interrupts from hardware and are handled by CPU itself.
si -software interrupt, 
st -steal time, very important understand, especially when we are working on virtualized environment. this number represents the time "stealed" from the virtual machine by hypervisor. how long system needs to wait for resources from hypervisor.

Process ID

PID - process ID number
USER -process owner
PR -default priority to the process, scheduled by kernel when process was started
NI -nice, shows value 
VIRT -total amount of memory used by the process
RES -RAM memory used by process
SHR -amount of memory shared with other proceeses.
S -process state 
%CPU -what amount of available CPU is used by the process.
%MEM -like for CPU, but this value represents memory usage
TIME+ -Total time of CPU usage by the process
COMMAND -quite obvious, this process is executed.

hit below key for 
1 -for cpu information
t -for task information
m -memory information
H -threats
v,V -shows trees of processes, instead of simple list[helps to understand parent-child proceeses]
s -for refresh time
w -if many settings were changed and we wish to keep them for longer time, we don't need to provide all of them again we use top again simply pass 'w'
